# Predicting Pandemics: An Exploration of the Predictors of Zoonotic Virus Human-to-Human Transmissibility 
Zoonotic spillover is the transmission of a pathogen from a vertebrate animal to a human. While these events are hard to detect and may be relatively rare, they present an outsized global health burden, as many infectious diseases, including HIV/AIDS, Ebola, and, most recently, COVID-19, have zoonotic origins. While the viruses that cause these diseases can be transmitted from human to human, not all zoonotic viruses are. This therefore has many implications for public health interventions, as being able to quantify the human-to-human (H2H) transmissibility potential of emerging infections and variants of concern will allow researchers and policy makers to better tailor interventions towards hosts and/or humans. This project sought to use machine learning models to determine the physiological and phylogenetic characteristics of viruses and hosts that are predictive of whether or not a zoonotic virus is H2H transmissible. 

The dataset used for this study comes from spillover.global, a database produced by Grange et al. of virus detections in wildlife that had been confirmed by PCR and/or genetic sequencing. Virus detection was collated from multiple sources, including a viral discovery project between 2009 and 2019 in which viruses were screened from over 500,000 samples from 74,000 wild animals in 28 countries, the National Center for Biotechnology Information virus nucleotide database, and a literature review of zoonotic viruses. This resulted in metadata for 887 viruses from 19 virus families. After cleaning and pre-processing this data, the accuracy of several models (Decision Tree, Random Forest, K-Nearest Neighbor, Naive Bayes, Logistic Regression, and Suport Vector Machine) was compared by calculating their F1 scores. 

The Random Forest model, which was found to have the highest F1 score on the validation set, was then used to perform feature selection and feature importance. These results were then compared with the log-odds coefficient estimates of a Generalized Linear Model using a logit-link function. The results of this study found that non-segmented RNA viruses with multiple modes of transmission are most likely to be human-to-human transmissible. 
